My courage to gather and went down through a meeting.
Are you ready to go?
Yeah.
Okay, the tape is rolling.
Good.
The first thing I wanted to ask you, Mr. Bradbury, the back in Los Angeles when you connected
with that science fiction group that I've read about, the other group with Williamson
and Heinlein and so forth, how did you get involved with them and what kind of influence
do they have on you, if any?
Well, Bruce Yerke, who was the secretary for the Science Fantasy Society, wrote me a letter
in October of 1937.
That was my last year in high school.
They invited me to come down to Clifton's cafeteria and meet the group.
And I was very shy and a little fearful.
I didn't know anyone.
But nevertheless, I got my courage to gather and went down through a meeting.
And that was my first encounter with Forrest Ackerman, who became my first editor.
He was editing a magazine called Imagination.
And then along over the next year or so, I met Henry Kupner, Arthur Barnes, Lee Brackett,
Robert Heinlein, Jack Williamson, Ross Rockland, Henry Hasse.
They all became friends.
And in one way or another, influenced me.
We were very close.
And I was beginning to write a lot of very bad science fiction, very bad fantasy.
I still haven't learned to write well.
But these people were very patient with me.
And especially, I remember Robert Heinlein and his wonderful wife, who invited me up
to their home on occasion.
I got to read a lot of his manuscripts before they were published.
He was just starting to write.
He came to a meeting at the Science Fantasy Club in, I believe it was 19, early 30, 38
or 39.
He had just written his first story and sold it to a founding science fiction.
So he was a beginner, just as I was, except he was about 11 years older.
He was around, I would say, 31.
And I think I was 19 when I met him.
So it was that kind of situation where you had personal contact with writers who were
already established or were establishing themselves.
And of course, it changed my life forever because I had acceptance.
People were willing to put up with me and read my terrible stories.
You are a self-taught writer, though, are you not?
Well, I guess you can say that.
Most writing, almost every art form, is self-teaching.
Except what you need around the edges is shortcut.
If people can help you by recommending certain books, either books on writing or books which
give you examples of excellent writing.
I remember Henry Kutner was always calling Lee Brackett up or calling me up and saying,
hey, have you read Captain Adam Porter?
You know the work of John Collier.
What about Yudor Welty?
Well, this kind of shortcut is so important that you break away from your own field and
move on out into the white culture and bring back into the science fiction and the fantasy
field influences from people like Kipling or a Somerset mom or John Collier.
So that's where having a good teacher is important.
Not that they teach you all that much or that intensely, but the fact that they care about
you at all is very good for your sense of malnutrition.
We all feel as if we haven't set ourselves well enough to mirror that age.
Okay, give us about a second.
David has to make a change on the one.
Okay, we did it.
Okay, listen, I'm sure you've answered this question many times before, but I think I know
what your answer is.
But you've obviously been accepted by the so-called mainstream audience and you've sort of broken
out of the area of science fiction where you're typed as a specific kind of writer.
How did you make that switch?
Well, you just automatically think about it for a lifetime.
I always dreamt of being number one, a writer, not a writer of science fiction or a writer
of fantasy, but a writer period.
I had huge heroes that I looked up to in the world, people like Shakespeare and a lot of
the great poets, Emily Dickinson and Robert Frost when I was in 19th.
And then as I got older and began to see the world of the theater around me more, I wanted
to do theater work.
I loved motion pictures.
I knew that eventually I wanted to do some films.
So my interests were always very Catholic, very broad.
And it was only a matter of time before I would experiment with each of these things.
And at the same time, I was writing and having my first success in selling stories to Weirdtales.
I was beginning to write short stories in the larger fields, stories about racial relationships
or stories about travel inside America.
A little bit of everything I was experimenting with.
But it took me until I was around 25.
A friend of mine called me on the phone that he was going to Mexico to travel for two months.
Did I want to come along?
Well, I thought I can't.
I don't have any money.
I was still only making around $20 a week selling stories to Weirdtales.
I usually sold six stories to Weirdtales every year, which gave me around $120 for the whole year.
And then I sold an occasional murder mystery and a few science fiction stories.
So my income at the time was around $2,500 a year if I was lucky.
And he said, oh, you're such a coward.
He said, here the war is over.
War has been over in Europe a month or so.
You should travel and you're afraid to send out your short story.
You're afraid of being rejected.
I know you've got a lot of excellent broad literary middle stream fictions.
I'm actually retype them and send them out.
So by God, he egged me on and I got three short stories out of my files.
I retype them, put an assumed name on each one, William Elliott.
I mailed them off without an agent, without any representation,
with not even a letter from myself to the editors.
And one story to Charm, one story to Madame Azale, and another one to Collier's.
Well, all three stories sold within three days of each other.
One story sold on August 19th to Charm on the 20th, one to Madame Azale.
And on my birthday, the 22nd of August, I sold my first short story to Collier's.
So all of a sudden I had an aggregate of $1,000, which arrived in the mail.
Well, $1,000 back in 1945 would be like getting $15,000 in the mail today.
I was out of my head.
I couldn't believe it.
So without money, I picked up and went to Mexico with him for six weeks where I had
a whole series of adventures that scared the hell out of me and caused me to write
some of my best weird stories when I came home.
So that's the way I made the transition, because someone called me a coward and
dared me to send my stories out.
OK, fine.
In much of your work, I've read interviews given that you have given to people too.
And I've heard you say this and I pick it up from your work too, that oftentimes you
seem to have a mistrust, maybe of technology and the intellect.
And I wondered how you can be so committed to the space program with with.
Well, that's a misinterpretation.
It's never been true.
I've never mistrusted technologies.
Only people have a big difference there.
It's the way we use the automobile, for instance.
There's nothing wrong with cars that having more safe drivers won't won't change.
If I had my way, I would pass a lot of miles to eliminate every every male driver in
the country, because it's mainly men who do all the killing and it's men who raise
the insurance rate, especially young men between the ages of 18 and 22.
They're the real killers.
So if we pass laws eliminating all young men drivers from our society, we could save 30
or 40,000 lives a year.
Let the girls do the driving.
Let the women do it because they're calmer.
They're quieter.
They're not maniacal.
They're not trying to prove anything.
So what I'm afraid of is people and specific areas.
Now, when it comes to computers, space travel, IBM's electric type.
That's what I'm afraid of is these are all beautiful.
We're using them well.
And the future is very exciting because of it.
Now, I've tried to pick those technologies that I criticized.
For instance, there was a certain moment in history in Los Angeles where they were
threatening to put Muzak on our, with advertising on our buses.
And I immediately mounted a campaign with some friends, thousands of people who said,
oh, no, you don't.
Bad enough, we have all these posters all over the place.
But to trap us on buses, then make us listen to music we don't want to hear or
advertisements we don't want to hear.
So I'm anti the way that particular technology was going to be used.
And I'm anti intellect when intellectual, when it gets in the way of creativity.
People who pretend to be intelligent at times, try to tell me a creator and a
certain field ought to create.
Well, those intellectuals are dangerous.
Because they're telling me my business and I know it better than they do.
So I'm not afraid of intellectuals when they behave.
It's only when they get some mad idea in their head and become insane with the
idea where they become a danger.
Okay, good.
I know you've been involved in various aspects of the space program before
committees and all sorts of things.
Do you have any involvements right now that you're connected with?
Yeah, I'm trying to build a space museum here in Los Angeles and various other
groups are building similar things.
So where I somewhere along the line, I'm going to help or I'm going to lead or
I'm going to do something.
I want to, I've been working with a Smithsonian institution in Washington on
a couple of projects.
One, I hope to write a program, a special entertaining program for the
planetarium there, the National Air and Space Museum.
I don't know if that's ever going to come off or not.
I've done one preliminary sketch for them.
I've been working off and on with the planetarium in Los Angeles.
I'd like to do more programs for them.
And I'm starting work right now on a grand opera, a science fiction grand
opera for the Seattle Opera Company based on the Moby Dick mythology.
And I wrote a play several years ago called Leviathan 99, about a great
white comet coming down through the universe once every 40 years.
And this blind space captain goes out to attack the comet that put out his eyes
when he was a young astronaut.
So you have the basic mythology of Herman Melville and Moby Dick, but
transferred over into the space age with spaceships instead of whaling ships,
a great white comet instead of a great white whale.
And the language, of course, of the play is mine.
And, uh, but the whole thing is dedicated to the memory of Herman Melville.
So I'll be working on that.
And then in several months, I'll be going down to Disney World, to the
opening of Epcot, which is a world's fair of the future, a permanent one,
which is what Walt Disney always wanted.
And at the center of that permanent world's fair, Epcot is the building
called Spaceship Earth.
And I wrote the basic scenario for the interior of that building.
A dramatization of ideas covering a hundred thousand years of human history,
going into the deep past, coming ahead into the present and blasting off into the
future.
So I have a lot of irons in the fire right now.
Things that I hope will change our future all.
Okay, I'm going to have to follow up on that question, on that comment about the
grand opera.
Is that going to be a, okay, you're going to adapt the opera from your play?
Okay.
Is that going to be a, from the way you explained that, is that a, a parody, a
serious work, or what's the tone?
Okay.
Do you think science fiction can be translated into that sort of medium successfully?
Absolutely.
We've, we've, uh, after all, we've, we've done so many things in the past.
Uh, look at all the different kinds of science fiction films we've made.
Uh, high, low, uh, bright, dumb in between.
You name it, all kinds of things.
There's no reason why, uh, there is one science fiction opera in the
existence already called Aniara, a Swedish opera, which premiered about 20 years
ago, but it's, it's electronic and it's 12 tone, as I recall.
Uh, it's not much fun to listen to.
It's pretty monotonous.
And I thought it was time for someone else to try yet another opera and see if
this time it wouldn't work.
Okay.
I'll sure be interested when that one comes out.
Um, let me just ask one more general question of this nature.
Uh, again, it's an obvious question, but still it's a big one too.
But, uh, why does, why do you think space holds such a romantic interest for mankind,
space and space travel?
Well, I don't know if it's a romantic interest.
I think it starts as romance and then turns into something called survival.
In other words, we don't want to stay here on this planet.
This is our seatbed planet.
And those of us with any sense of the destiny of mankind, whatever that is,
look to space to, to put our seed on other worlds and then move us on out into
the universe so that the cognition of the universe continues so that we gain some
measure of immortality.
What's the use of, of having a Shakespeare or a George Bernard Shaw or the, the
beautiful paintings of the world or the great films or the fantastic book?
If everything's going to be lost when our world freezes or our world burns, if the
sun should explode.
So space travel is a very practical endeavor made by we human beings to ensure
the fact that we'll go on living for several million years.
It's a very practical exercise.
Okay.
That's an excellent answer.
Thank you.
Um, let me hit a high, just a few high points of some of your works.
Um, something wicked this way come.
Did you have a particular inspiration for that story or impetus behind it?
Not really.
It all started a long time ago.
I wrote a short story for weird tales called the black ferris.
So, and I've always been in love with carnivals and circuses and illustrated
men and wars and pickies and you name it.
So over the years, all this material accumulated in one night, about 24 years ago,
Jean Kelly invited me over to MGM studios here to see a new film of his called
Invitations of the Dance.
And part of that film is a sort of dance ballet concerned with a clown, a carnival
sort of material that lawn cheney senior once did 60 years ago in American film.
He did a lot of films about circuses and, uh, uh, armless, legless performers, all
kinds of road tests that he worked with and pretended to imitate.
So I came out of the screening of Jean Kelly's film and walked home with my wife
and lamenting all the way the fact that I'd never worked for Kelly and wanting
very much to do so.
So I got home and I rummaged through all my material to find something to send
to Jean Kelly and I found the black ferris and I took several weeks to write it
into a longer 70 page screen adaptation, uh, treatment outline.
And I took it to Kelly and he immediately said, my God, I must direct this.
Well, can I have an option on it?
I'll take it to Europe and try to get some money.
He went to Europe for a number of weeks and months and finally returned and said,
it's no use.
Nobody wants to put up any money for this.
Thanks very much.
And so long.
Well, I was heartbroken because I wanted to work for Kelly and I said to heck with
it, I sat down and I wrote the long screen treatment into a novel.
Took me about two years and the novel was published in the late summer of 1962,
20 years ago.
And then over the years since I've done four or five other versions of it as
screenplays and now finally at the end of this year, the final product, the film
based on the book based on my new screenplay will be out in the theaters with Jason
Robards and Jonathan Price from the Royal Shakespeare Theater.
Do you have a hand in the actual making of that movie?
Absolutely.
I did the screenplay and now I'm helping with the editing of the film.
I'm going in and sitting with my director with the heads of the studio making
suggestions about certain sound effects indicating where I think maybe we don't
have enough music or the music isn't a lot enough.
These little subtle tunings of a film that occur in the last month of the process
before the film is in its final form.
And so far people are listening to me and I must say I'm having a good relationship
with the director in the studio.
They care about the project and I make whole pages of notes and turn them in.
And now in the next few weeks we'll finish the job.
Good, yeah, I know that was being made into a movie.
We're looking forward to that.
Um, so am I.
Listen, I was going to ask one more question on that book and some of your other
stories. You often use carnival material as I guess a symbol of evil or something.
I wondered why you did that.
I think most of us are uncomfortable around carnivals and circuses.
You sense that the people who run them are evil people.
There is something wrong with most carnival people.
The workers, it's a very tough life.
It's a rough existence.
And it's run by a bunch of tramps and vagabonds and people who go from town to town.
They have no roots.
And I should imagine there's a lot that goes on beyond the behind the scenes.
We can't even guess that.
Not that there isn't a hierarchy there in a big circus, of course there is.
And the people at the top of the hierarchy are the trapeze people.
They are the royal family.
And then you go downwards through the various levels of performers,
depending on their athletic powers.
But it's a very difficult life.
And, um, it's a miracle if most of these people make it through and keep their sanity.
So when you're a child, you sense, especially in the city, the little carnival
that come to visit your hometown, you sense the uneasiness, the
sly life, the sense of evil behind the scenes in these people.
I suppose that's where my my fictions came from.
OK, let me move for just a second to the Martian Chronicles.
Did you gather those stories together after they'd all been written and published elsewhere?
Or did you really aim at one volume?
No, I didn't know what I was doing.
That's the best way to do things.
Just do them and then wake up some morning and discover you've got a book.
I went to New York City in June of 1949.
My wife was pregnant with our first child.
We had about $80 in the bank and I took the Greyhound bus to New York
and I took all my short stories with me.
Oh, 80 or 90, 100 short stories, hoping to sell one or two collections of stories
to some publisher.
Well, I had meetings with various people at Simon & Schuster and Doubleday.
And they all said, look, we don't publish short stories.
Nobody buys them.
Nobody carries them.
And then one night I had dinner with Walter Bradbury at Doubleday.
No relation to me.
A wonderful gentleman, very bright gentleman.
And sitting there at dinner that night, he said, Ray, what about all those Martian stories?
Isn't there a novel there?
Isn't there some way of hanging them all together?
It seems to me there's a common thread.
I said, oh my God, you know, years ago I made notes about doing a series of Chronicles.
And then threw the notes somewhere and forgot about them.
So my subconscious must have remembered, and along through the years was putting these beads
on a single thread.
I went back to the YMCA that night, sat in my underwear with a hot, hot summer evening,
terribly humid, and finished typing out an outline of a book which I called The Martian
Chronicles, which I then took to Doubleday the next day.
And they promptly bought the novel, plus The Illustrated Man, a collection of stories.
And I left New York City with, again, a fabulous $1,000, $500 for each book, which again,
35 years ago, it was a heck of a lot of money.
And it enabled me and my wife to make it through the next six or seven months and survive over
into the time when our first child was born.
OK, just one sort of a two-part question to end this on The Martian Chronicles.
I suppose then the order of the book was your own, the order of the stories, and if it was,
why did you put the million-year picnic as the final story?
It seemed a proper place to put it.
It seemed a culmination of all the stories.
And that my job in looking at all my stories was to guess where to place each.
And well, some of them, it was very easy.
I did a whole series of stories of first encounters on Mars with various expeditions.
So I knew those automatically had to be up front, along with an imaginary encounter in Illa,
where a woman dreams an invasion of Mars.
We never see the invasion itself of the Earthmen, but we know that secretly it must be there
somewhere that real people got killed by the jealous husband.
And then you go along through all the other encounters and what happens to Mars as a result
of the invasion by Earth people.
And ending with all of your final beats and a brief return to Earth for there will come soft
rains and then the million-year picnic at the end.
It all fell together in roughly two hours in my head at the typewriter that night at the YMCA.
Were you happy with the NBC production of that book?
I most certainly was not.
It was one of the most boring shows ever put on television.
And it's a great shame.
Obviously no one enjoyed doing it.
And the director obviously didn't enjoy it, which is a great shame,
because he should have got out of bed every morning and said,
let's have a ball, let's play, let's jump up and down and scream and yell and get something
out of this material.
But he obviously didn't do that.
So the whole thing is taste at a leaven pace.
And the actors were not directed.
Here and there, there are individual scenes that are quite lovely.
Thank God for that.
There were a few high points.
I think the encounter or the priests between the priests and the Christ figure and the fire
balloons was interestingly done.
And the encounter with Wilder and the Martian late at night when they discuss time travel
and who is alive and who isn't alive and who's down in the city.
I think that worked fine.
But on the whole, it was so boring, it will never be repeated.
You haven't heard anything about it ever coming back, have you?
No, but I might mention that two of us who do the show teach a science fiction fantasy
class here at Odessa College.
And we use snippets from that show that are quite successful pieces from it.
I taped the show all six hours of it and I've never played it since.
Yeah.
In fact, I've taped over most of it, but a friend of mine just arrived and he's yawning here
an indication that he agrees with my estimate of the show.
Yeah, it's a great shame, but I've had better luck this year with two television productions.
With the electric grandmother with Marines Stapleton and any friend of Nicholas Nicolby
is a friend of mine with Fred Quinn.
Those both turned out very well indeed.
Thank God.
Yeah, we thought they did too.
Let me just quickly ask you a couple on Fahrenheit 451.
Was there a particular inspiration for that book or did it just grow?
It was a combination of things.
I'd gotten interested with book burners over a period of time.
And when I wrote the book, it was the beginning of the McCarthy era, the Joseph McCarthy period,
when there was a lot of talk about books being banned.
Not many of them got banned, thank God.
For a brief moment there, I think they took a few American books off of foreign library shelves in
army libraries and then President Eisenhower ordered them all put back on,
which proved what a bright man he was, thank goodness.
But it was during that period that I
suppose my subconscious
fermented on all this and said I've got to do a book about my anger about libraries because
libraries is really the place where I was born and raised myself, grew up,
and have lived for a lifetime.
They really are very super special to me.
And I go in bookstores constantly.
I can't stay away from them.
I buy too many books.
I'm compulsive about it.
So the novel wrote itself in nine days.
I went up to UCLA in 1950, and I spent nine days there in the typing room in the basement of the UCLA
library with about 12 students sitting around me.
And I played these dime a half hour typewriter machines.
And I typed the novel on those dime machines.
And I spent around $9.40 typing the novel.
So it's a grand place to write a book like that, isn't it, in the basement of a library?
Yeah. Do you think we're heading in that direction at all?
There are a lot of rumors, but we hear those rumors every year.
And there are always some stupid librarians, some stupid mayor,
or some dumb pressure group in some town somewhere in our country every year for the last 60 years
that want to censor this or censor that.
And then they blow away.
They're just chaffing the wind.
And don't pay any attention to them.
And if they grow giant size, call me on the phone.
I'll come over and kick them in the kishkish.
Okay, listen, I think I know the answer to this too,
but are your short stories written from just inspiration,
or do you have to exercise a kind of discipline on them?
No, no, it's all passion. It's all explosion.
I get up in the morning, throw up in my typewriter at breakfast, and clean up at noon.
So that's the way to write.
It makes for very sticky typewriters, but...
Now, everything has to be fun.
If it isn't fun, it's not going to be any good.
You get an idea and say, God, this is a great idea.
So I try to teach this to my friends,
and teach them just to fall in love and go mad with ideas and get the work done.
Okay, I've read ones where you thought that you would...
If you weren't a writer, you may become a preacher or something.
What did you mean by that?
Well, I could shift... If I had my druthers,
I could shift gears tomorrow and become about seven things.
I'd make a very good preacher, a rabbi, a minister,
a priest. I'd make a wonderful pope.
Go out and pontificate the world, because I care about those ideas.
I'm fascinated with the problems of theology,
or I would make a good teacher in various art fields.
I would make a good artist. I would make a fine actor.
I don't know if I'd be a brilliant one,
but I sure have a hell of a lot of fun doing it.
I'd make a good book salesman.
I can think of dozens of things.
That I would like to be, that I'll never have a chance to be.
My loves are multitudinous,
and I don't understand people who are not in love.
There's so much. I'd make a good director.
If I had the patience, I wanted to take time.
So there are about eight or nine things that I'd be...
I'd be a good politician, because I care about the future of cities,
and rebuilding them and changing them.
I'd make a good architect.
I do have an education up to a point in architecture and urban planning.
All these are my loves.
Okay, excellent. How are you doing on time now?
Is this getting to the...
I should quit now,
but if you want to call me back in a week and do another half hour...
Yeah, we would. Could we make it maybe near the middle,
or third week in August, something like that?
You going to be around then?
Absolutely. Drop me a note in the meantime.
Yeah. Okay, listen, we sure appreciate your time, Mr. Bury.
And we will give you the tapes when they're edited, obviously.
And we'll be back to you sometime in later August.
All right, swell. Okay?
Bye-bye now.